---
title: "Case Study #1: Automated Reporting"
date: 2014-04-01
tags: case studies, automation, reporting
---

This is the first of several case studies I'll be posting here. The idea is to give you a sense of types of things we can do to improve your financial operations and help you focus on what's really important to your business. I'll mostly be drawing on my own experiences with clients and former employers. Although I may need to generalize some of the situational specifics, the stories should still be relevant.

In this first edition, I'll be discussing financial reporting. In early 2012, I became involved with a three year old technology company which essentially had no financial reporting to speak of. They might cobble together statements every few quarters, but there was no consistent process. Moreover, the situation was complicated by the varying needs of the different stakeholders. The company's equity investors required quarterly historical statements as well as forecasts. A debt provider needed monthly statements and performance to budget. Certain middle managers needed access to varying levels of information in order to manage their budgets. And of course, the senior leadership of the company needed a clear, effective and real-time view of financial status. Producing all of this information manually, even for such an early stage company, could be a full-time job unto itself. Clearly a solution was needed. 

I found that given the limited budget of the company, there were three key aspects to solving this problem: (1) appropriate data linkages, (2)  flexible and customized reporting templates and (3) automated transmission. At the time, this company was on Quickbooks Enterprise, which certainly has a variety of powerful reporting functions. However, it did not provide the flexibility to meet the needs of this situation. So the first step involved building custom exports from Quickbooks in order to get the raw data into a usable form. While it's fairly straightforward to do this manually, you can also automate it through the Quickbooks API. I then developed a custom Visual Basic script to parse this data and prepare it for being fed into the various templates I was putting together. 

As I mentioned above, the various stakeholders in this scenario needed the financial data in different intervals (monthly, quarterly, etc), different directions (forecast vs. pro forma) and at different levels of detail. Although it's all based on the same data, it would be extremely tedious to produce and maintain all of these views manually. I therefore build a number custom excel templates, with some accompanying code, which reach into the prepared data and summarize in a form that is appropriate for each party. 

The last step in this process is publication. The company's investors typically wanted the information over email, whereas the managers liked to have it on their local intranet (eventually Dropbox). Fortunately, Visual Basic makes this very easy. On the back-end of all of this scripting, I included some logic which routes the output of these templates to a file directory or an email server. 

The end result of all of this work is a financial reporting process which is robust, reliable and completely automated. At the click of a button at the end of the month, a variety of financial statements and data, in exactly the form requested, are generated and routed to the appropriate people. What used to take several days, and cost thousands of consulting dollars, now happens in seconds. Moreover, the data is more reliable as there is virtually human content in the process. 